# Smart-Weather-Station
Smart Weather Station   Introduction: Weather plays an important part in our day to day life and activities. Hence, arises the need to monitor and forecast the weather. A lot of TV and radio channels, hence provide data like temperature and humidity, from weather stations installed around the area of interest. However, these stations give only general data and are never area specific. Hence, a home based weather station, would give real time and area specific weather condition reports. This is especially useful for laboratories, where the experiments are affected by any changes in the weather. A lot of personal weather stations are available in the market, but they are expensive to buy and to maintain. From a short market analysis, it is noted that the wireless weather stations are even more expensive. The stations aren’t energy efficient. All of this combined, may prove a huge economic burden, for someone requiring local weather data. Construction: To combat these problems, a personal weather station is built, on the Arduino development board, using cheap sensors, like the DHT 11 temperature and humidity sensor, the HC04 ultrasonic sensor, an ldr, the BMP280 pressure sensor and a thermistor (for detection of fluctuation in temperature). Other components in the project include, Arduino Uno development board, an active buzzer, 1 small and 1 big breadboard, HC05 Bluetooth module, 2 NPN 2n2222 transistors, a potentiometer, a 16x 2LCD display, resistors, 1 capacitor, an active buzzer, jumper cables and wires. Working and applications: When power is supplied to the Arduino Uno, the setup begins sensing data, from the environment. When an object is brought in front of the ultrasonic sensor, first the text(at 97 cm) and then the led(at 47 cm) of the LCD display is turned on. The distance between sensor and object is made more accurate, by feedback, from the DHT11 sensor. The led turns on, with a beep sound, from the active buzzer, which acts as an object detector of sorts as well. The ldr measures the light intensity in LUX, which can be used to derive the overhead cloud cover, etc. and also controls the brightness of led of LCD display, through 4 modes of brightness, according to the ambient light. The thermistor is kept slightly separate, from the general apparatus, via wire extensions, which helps analyze data such as rate of heating/cooling and change in temperature in a certain period of time, of the ambient air, or any other substance. The LCD display, displays basic data such as temperature and relative humidity.  The Bluetooth module, is used to transmit data, such as light intensity, distance between object and ultrasonic sensor, air pressure, Change in Temperature, rate of change of temperature, humidity, humiture(Heat index) and dew point to any Bluetooth receiver, such as a mobile phone.  A Bluetooth transmitter, connected to the module, can also be used as a remote to turn on the text and led, for some time, when not in range of ultrasonic sensor, or to turn the led off, when in range. On a grander scale, the setup could even be used to automate homes, by controlling the lights, garden sprinklers, indoor thermostat, etc. ,based on the empirical data collected. Conclusion: In conclusion, this setup would prove very useful to any layman- wanting to know about local weather conditions, casual hobbyists- desiring empirical data from various sensors, scientists desiring data to conduct experiments, anyone desiring to automate their home- based on the weather conditions, Students or weather scientists- who want to analyze the local weather trends. All of this, in an economical manner, that’s made energy efficient, through automation, using various cheap sensors, readily available in the market.
